500166 TAP0010.1177/0959354313500166Theory & PsychologyWagoner

2013

Article

Bartlett’s concept of
schema in reconstruction

Theory & Psychology
0(0) 1 –23
© The Author(s) 2013
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0959354313500166
tap.sagepub.com

Brady Wagoner
Aalborg University

Abstract
The concept of schema was advanced by Frederic Bartlett to provide the basis for a radical temporal
alternative to traditional spatial storage theories of memory. Bartlett took remembering out of
the head and situated it at the enfolding relation between organism and environment. Through
an  activity  of  “turning  around  upon  schemata,”  humans  can  create  ruptures  in  their  seamless
flow  of  activity  in  an  environment  and  take  active  control  over  mind  and  behavior.  This  paper
contextualizes Bartlett’s concept of schema within broader theoretical developments of his time,
examines its temporal dimensions in relation to embodied action and memory “reconstruction,”
shows how these temporal dynamics are later abandoned by early cognitive “schema” theories
which revert to the metaphor of storage, and explores strategies by which we might fruitfully bring
schema back into psychology as an embodied, dynamic, temporal, holistic, and social concept.

Keywords
Bartlett, dynamic methodology, embodiment, memory, reconstruction, schema, temporality

No  other  concept  in  Frederic  Bartlett’s  oeuvre  has  generated  as  much  attention  as
“schema,” except perhaps the related concept “reconstruction.” Psychology is today lit-
tered  with  references  to  “story  schema,”  “self-schema,”  “gender  schema,”  “event
schema,”  and  a  wide  range  of  other  words  combined  with  schema.1 Add  to  these  the
derivative concepts of “script” and “frame” and one begins to get a sense of how widely
and  variably  the  concept  is  used. At  a  very  general  level  contemporary  psychologists
have defined schema as a knowledge structure in the head that is used in the storage of
information. This is somewhat ironic because Bartlett (1932) intended to utilize the con-
cept to develop an alternative to the storage theory of memory. For him, schema was to
provide the basis for a theory of remembering that was embodied, dynamic, temporal,
holistic,  and  social.  Bartlett,  however,  provided  only  a  hesitant  and  sketchy  account

Corresponding author:
Brady Wagoner, Department of Communication & Psychology, Aalborg University, Kroghstæde 3, Aalborg,
9220, Denmark.
Email: wagoner@hum.aau.dk

2

Theory & Psychology 0(0)

rather than a fully developed theory. This left the concept of schema wide open for recon-
struction.  Since  Bartlett,  psychologists  of  different  generations  and  orientations  have
assimilated schema into their own frameworks, which Bartlett’s reconstructive schema
theory would have itself predicted.

The present paper explores the concept of schema’s origins, its place within Bartlett’s
thought, and its successive reconstructions by others after him. First, I present the trace
theory of memory, which Bartlett was reacting against in developing his own theory. The
memory trace was the dominant metaphor of memory in physiological, psychological, and
philosophical discourses of Bartlett’s time, and perhaps our own as well. Second, I argue
that Bartlett took a functionalist approach to memory, leading him to reject the usefulness
of literal recall in an ever-changing world. Rather than treating memory as a substance, he
explores it as a situated activity made possible by a myriad different processes. Third, I
discuss Head’s (1920) concept of schema together with Bartlett’s critique and extension of
it. For Head, “schema” was a purely embodied concept, whereas for Bartlett it takes on
social and reflexive significance. Fourth, I outline remembering as a self-reflective process
and  explicate  the  phrase  “turning  around  upon  [one’s]  own  schemata  and  constructing
them afresh” (Bartlett, 1932, p. 206). Fifth, I look at the different waves of reconstructing
“schema” since Bartlett and in so doing make an argument for reconstructing schema as a
temporal, dynamic, embodied, holistic, and social process in future research.

The trace theory of memory

Bartlett’s “theory of remembering” is explicitly developed as an alternative to the trace
theory of memory, which has dominated Western thinking about memory for two and
half centuries (Danziger, 2008). Plato was the first to posit it in his Theaetetus, where he
had us imagine that there was a wax tablet in the mind called “the memory,” in which
new experiences leave an imprint. When we remember an experience, we simply read off
what was impressed on the wax. This sets the stage for regarding memory as just a copy
of  experience,  a  faded  form  of  perception.  This  idea  was  most  clearly  developed  by
British philosophers such as George Berkeley, David Hume, and John Stuart Mill. For
them old knowledge was represented as a stored collection of distinct mental images.
Although contemporary theorists have moved away from the specific metaphor of wax
tablet, the root metaphor of memory as individuated marks on a surface has persisted
down the ages, such that we now speak of memories as being like code magnetically
inscribed on a computer hard disk or physically inscribed in the brain as an “engram”
(literally  “that  which  is  converted  into  writing”).2  Bartlett  (1932)  described  the  trace
theory in general terms thus:

When any specific event occurs some trace, or some group of traces, is made and stored up in
the organism or mind. Later, an immediate stimulus re-excites the trace, or group of traces, and,
provided a further assumption is made … that the trace somehow carries with it a temporal sign,
the re-excitement appears to be equivalent to recall. (p. 198)

This notion of spatial storage of memories is now so deeply embedded in our thinking
that we tend to take the figurative assumptions of the metaphor as literally true. Danziger

Wagoner

3

(2002) has argued that the metaphor leads us to assume memory is a mental faculty liter-
ally  “in  the  head”;  that  it  is  naturally  divisible  into  three  distinct  phases,  now  called
“encoding,” “storage,” and “retrieval”; that memories are stored as individuated “traces,”
now presumed to exist in the brain; and that memories retain the same meaning irrespec-
tive of the context in which they take part. Traditional experiments on memory never put
these assumptions into question with their use of wordlists, associative pairs, and seg-
mented stories, their analytic focus on counting “items” remembered, forgotten, or dis-
torted, and their treatment of the laboratory as a kind of social vacuum.

Ebbinghaus’s  (1885/1913)  classic  study  Memory:  A  Contribution  to  Experimental
Psychology  is  typical  in  this  regard.  Bartlett’s  criticisms  of  it  are  revealing.  First,  he
questions  the  tendency  to  consider  humans  as  passively  reacting  to  stimuli. Although
psychology is now willing to accept the mind is active, it is still studied by most psy-
chologists using a neo-behaviorist methodology whereby some stimulus is varied (inde-
pendent  variable),  which  causes  the  individual  to  respond  in  a  particular  way  (as
measured by the dependent variable). This approach is guided by a search for “efficient
causality” (Humean linear cause–effect relations) rather than “agent causality” (where
the person is considered an active center of causality; see Harré 2002).3 Second, Bartlett
points  out  that  simplifying  the  stimulus  does  not  necessarily  simplify  the  response.
Participants  still  tended  to  give  nonsense  syllables  a  meaning.  Moreover,  this  very
attempt to use simple and meaningless stimuli, so as to isolate the response, results in
wholly artificial conditions with little relation to that response’s workings in everyday
life. Lastly, experiments are not social vacuums; they are social contexts that channel
human responses in particular directions.

From storage to action: Bartlett’s functionalism

In contrast to the trace theory, which treats memory as an isolated mental faculty, Bartlett
starts with a whole organism actively involved with its environment. The mind is taken
“out of the head” and situated in the ongoing transactions between a person and his or her
environment.4 From this perspective, remembering is considered as a situated activity,
bringing together multiple different processes, to act in the world. Mind and memory are
here not separate entities or substances but sets of processes contributing to environmen-
tal adaptation. In Bartlett’s (1932) own words:

I have never regarded memory as a faculty, as a reaction narrowed and ringed around, containing all
its peculiarities and all explanations within itself. I have regarded it rather as one achievement in the
line of the ceaseless struggle to master and enjoy a world full of variety and rapid change. (p. 314)

A number of theorists from around the world at this time were developing a functionalist
approach with similar assumptions (e.g., Dewey, Mead, Vygotsky, Baldwin, Bergson,5
von Uexküll, etc.). They were all reacting against the tendency to separate mind from
activity in the world and describe it simply in terms of its inner contents. Titchener, for
example, used a method of self-observation to describe the contents of mind. The prob-
lem was not the focus on mental contents as such, but rather, investigating them in this
way, they were removed from the concrete thoughts and feelings of everyday life and the

4

Theory & Psychology 0(0)

function that they had there. With functionalism the emphasis shifts to an analysis of the
conditions under which a particular psychological or behavioral response occurs. These
thinkers likewise rejected the opposing behaviorist approach for its exclusion of mind
and its analysis of reactions as simply determined by some external stimulus and artifi-
cially separated from the broader context of action.

In applying a functionalist approach to the study of memory, the question of memory
capacity or accuracy becomes subordinated to the question of how remembering helps a
person function in the environment in which he or she lives. According to Bartlett (1932),
literal  recall  is  in  most  conditions  dysfunctional,  whereas  constructive  remembering,
which flexibly adjusts itself to the context of occurrence, is of great utility, given that the
environment changes.

So-called  “literal,”  or  accurate,  recall  is  an  artificial  construction  of  the  armchair,  or  of  the
laboratory.  Even  if  it  could  be  secured,  in  the  enormous  majority  of  instances  it  would  be
biologically detrimental. Life is a continuous play of adaptation between changing response
and varying environment. Only in a relatively few cases—and those mostly the production of
an elaborately guarded civilization—could the retention unchanged of the effects of experience
be anything but a hindrance. (p. 16)

Bartlett’s rather low opinion of literal recall is almost the exact opposite of most cogni-
tive approaches to memory, which focus almost exclusively on accuracy as the ultimate
standard for its evaluation. Thus, “construction” is considered a vice of memory and has
rarely been explored as more than a process leading to memory “distortion.” By contrast,
in Bartlett’s account “construction” was indicative of the directedness and creativity of
human responses, which could not be adequately studied with a methodology that simply
considered  the  stimulus  as  determining  the  organism’s  response  or  that  removed  the
organism’s response from the environment in which it normally occurs.

Head’s schema theory

In the 1910s Bartlett invented a powerful methodology for studying remembering as a
more everyday social activity by, for instance, showing how foreign stories (e.g., War of
the Ghosts) are reconstructed in the direction of familiar social conventions. Yet it was
not until nearly two decades later that he was to articulate a general theory of remember-
ing  to  account  for  his  results.  Inspiration  for  this  theory  came  from  several  sources
(Northway, 1940a), but it was the work of Henry Head that he most explicitly mentions
in elaborating it. Bartlett frequently met with Head in Cambridge in the 1920s, on which
occasions Head had the habit of reading Bartlett drafts of his book Aphasia and Kindred
Disorders  of  Speech  (1926)  and  discussing  them  with  him.  Bartlett  thought  Head’s
research to be extremely important and felt the need to bring his own thinking in line
with Head’s ideas, although he did this critically, as we will see.

Head was a clinical neurologist who worked with brain-damaged patients. As a result
of their injury, many of Head’s patients were unable to register postural changes in their
body,  disrupting  voluntary  movement.  Consider  this  clinical  example,  which  Bartlett
(1932) also draws upon in his chapter “A Theory of Remembering”:

Wagoner

5

Place the patient’s affected arm in front of him on the bed, allowing him to see the position in
which it lies; close his eyes, and in most cases he will see a mental picture of his hand. Then
change its position while his eyes remain closed and he will continue to see a picture of the
hand in its old position. Moreover, if localization is not affected, he will name correctly the spot
stimulated but will refer it to the position in which he visualizes the hand. The visual image of
the limb remains intact, although the power of appreciating changes in position is abolished.
(Head, 1920, p. 605)

A physiologist, Munk (1890), was the first to pose the question of how earlier move-
ments in a chain are able to continue to exert an influence on latter movements, as hap-
pens with bodily skills. He answered that this is possible because mental images of our
body movements are stored in the cortex. However, Head showed that the image func-
tion remains intact even when the ability to seamlessly coordinate serial movements is
lost, as in the above example. Head concluded that appreciation of postural change must
be separate from the functioning of images. The former is a more fundamental process
and operates largely below the level of conscious awareness, whereas images function
consciously.  Head  calls  this  fundamental  unconscious  process  “schema,”  which  he
defines as “[t]hat combined standard against which all subsequent changes in posture are
registered before they enter consciousness”. He continues,

By means of perpetual alterations in position we are always building up a postural model of
ourselves which constantly changes. Every new posture of movement is recorded on this plastic
schema and the activity of the cortex brings every fresh group of sensations evoked by altered
posture into relation with it. Immediate postural recognition follows as soon as the recognition
is complete. (Head, 1920, pp. 605–606)

Thus, schema is a holistic and constantly revised record of one’s position, which pro-
vides the baseline for one’s next movement—for example, to make a step forward one
has to be aware of the current position of one’s leg. Schema is a kind of active and con-
tinuously revised memory, rather than one put away into storage only to be retrieved at a
later time. It is a generalization but not an abstraction of past experience. Head discusses
the  phenomena  of  the  phantom  limb  as  a  vivid  example  of  the  operation  of  schema.
Whereas above we saw the effects of schematic breakdown, the phantom limb demon-
strates what happens when schema remains intact while one’s body is suddenly dramati-
cally changed by the loss of a limb. Although the limb is no longer there, patients register
it as changing position alongside their entire body as they had done before; it remains
part of the “combined standard.” In one clinical case, the patient lost a finger several
months before losing their entire arm. As a result the patient’s phantom arm had four
fingers rather than five. Head also reports a case in which a patient’s phantom limb disap-
pears with a lesion that causes schematic breakdown, as described above.6

Bartlett’s elaboration of schema

Bartlett is sympathetic to Head’s theory but offers a number of terminological critiques.
Reviewing them will help us to understand what he wanted to do with the concept. First,
he thinks Head gives away far too much to earlier investigators when he speaks of the

6

Theory & Psychology 0(0)

cortex as “a storehouse of past impressions,” thus evoking the storage metaphor. A store
is a place you put things in the hope to find them later in the same conditions they were
put there, whereas schemata are said to be constantly active, developing, and influenced
by the present context. Head rejects the image theory of body movement, whereby pre-
sent  movement  is  compared  to  images  of  past  movement,  but  he  implicitly  accepts
assumptions of the storage analogy. Second, Head (1920) uses the phrase “rising into
consciousness” to describe the workings of schema, whereas Bartlett rejects a strict sepa-
ration  between  conscious  and  unconscious  processes.  If  anything,  schema  operates
below the level of self-reflective awareness and as such is not available to introspection.
Finally, Bartlett finds the word “schema” itself to be misleading. He says,

I strongly dislike the term “schema.” It is at once too definite and too sketchy. ... It suggests
some persistent, but fragmentary, “form of arrangement,” and it does not indicate what is very
essential to the whole notion, that the organised mass results of past changes of position and
posture  are  actively  doing  something  all  the  time;  are,  so  to  speak,  carried  along  with  us,
complete, though developing, from moment to moment. (Bartlett, 1932, pp. 200–201)

In this passage, Bartlett is all too aware of the danger of dividing and fixating a holistic,
living, moving process by using technical language to describe it. We are told instead that
schema should be understood as always operating “en masse,” “active,” and “developing.”
In spite of these pre-emptive measures, it will be shown below that early cognitive psychol-
ogy turns schema into the static structure that Bartlett tried to avoid. Given the problems
with  the  term  “schema,”  it  is  somewhat  surprising  that  Bartlett  continues  to  use  it  in
Remembering  (1932),  although  he  also  frequently  uses  different  terms,  reflecting  other
influences on his thought. His continued use of “schema” is likely done to express Head’s
influence on his theory. Bartlett’s preferred names for schema are also revealing. He says,

It would probably be best to speak of “active, developing patterns”; but the word “pattern,” too,
being now very widely and variously employed, has its own difficulties; and it, like “schema,”
suggests  a  greater  articulation  of  detail  than  is  normally  found.  I  think  probably  the  term
“organised  setting”  approximates  most  closely  and  clearly  to  the  notion  required.  (Bartlett,
1932, p. 201)

Bartlett  had  previously  used  the  words  “pattern,”  “organized,”  and  “setting”  in  other
contexts.  In  his  early  experiments  on  perceiving  and  imagining  (Bartlett,  1916),  he
explained how any psychological response involved an “effort after meaning,” an active
process of connecting given material to a “setting” or “scheme.” For example, partici-
pants named a briefly presented ambiguous figure an “anchor” or a “pre-historic battle-
axe,” thereby rendering their relation to it more definite. This is similar to Brentano’s
idea of mental acts as always pointing beyond themselves (i.e., having “intentionality”)
or the Gestalt idea of figure–ground relations. Thus, as early as 1916, “setting” refers to
a self-generated context for action and experience, which itself evolves with the event.

Similarly,  in  his  1923  book  Psychology  and  Primitive  Culture,  Bartlett  frequently
uses the phrase “cultural pattern” to describe folk conventions, such as the distinctive
styles of decorative art forms one finds in different social groups (Haddon, 1894). Social
groups  have  the  tendency  to  work  any  incoming  foreign  element  of  culture  into  their

Wagoner

7

existing “cultural patterns.” Like schema, these patterns are “plastic,” in that they adapt
themselves to fit new material while at the same time remaining relatively stable across
time. Thus, cultural patterns are to the group as schemata are to the individual (Wagoner,
2013b). At both levels, a flexible pattern is imposed on the incoming material, which
changes  the  material  but  in  so  doing  stabilizes  it  against  additional  dramatic  changes
(Collins, 2006). The above quote, however, indicates that by 1932 Bartlett was growing
dissatisfied with the word “pattern.” He ultimately prefers the term “organised setting,”
which  better  highlights  that  schemata  operate  at  the  developing  transaction  between
organism  and  environment,  rather  than  being  a  purely  cognitive  phenomenon  (i.e.,  a
mental representation).

Having  expressed  his  terminological  objections,  Bartlett  (1932)  proceeds  to  define

schema as

…  an  active  organization  of  past  reactions,  or  of  past  experiences,  which  must  always  be
supposed to be operating in any well-adapted organic response. That is, whenever there is any
order or regularity of behavior, a particular response is possible only because it is related to
other similar responses which have been serially organised, yet which operate, not simply as
individual members coming one after another, but as a unitary mass. … All incoming impulses
of a certain kind, or mode, go together to build up an active, organised setting. (pp. 200–201)

Driving a car, painting a picture, walking up the stairs, or recalling one’s phone number
are directed activities that operate as a seamless flow without self-reflection entering into
them. They require the unconscious coordination of a series of acts in time and space
through a certain attunement to the environment. When we first learn to drive a car, for
example, the series of movements needed do not easily flow from one to the other, but
with time we learn to do them without reflection. At this point, the activity of driving
functions as a “unitary mass” and cannot be analytically subdivided into separate actions
without losing the quality of the whole. It is the massed and unitary effects of previous
reactions that provide the basis for a new response while engaged in an activity. This is
not  a  mechanical  plan  wherein  one  distinct  movement  follows  another,  but,  rather,
dynamic, relating to the environment against the background of previous experience. In
other words, schemata provide an organism with a general orientation to its environment
and means of flexibly coordinating action within it. What is given in the environment is
unconsciously “fit” to our changing schemes of action and experience. Bartlett (1932)
gives the following example of a game of tennis:

When I make the stroke I do not, as a matter of fact, produce something absolutely new, and I
never merely repeat something old. The stroke is literally manufactured out of the living visual
and  postural  “schemata”  of  the  moment  and  their  interrelations.  I  may  say  and  think  that  I
reproduce exactly a series of text-book movements, but demonstrably I do not; just as, under
other circumstances, I may say and think that I reproduce exactly some isolated event which I
want to remember, and again demonstrably I do not. (pp. 201–202)

Bartlett also defines schema as an activity guided by an interest or master tendency. The
organism  neither  responds  to  nor  remembers  material  with  no  functional  relationship
with the active interest of the moment. The above quote describes how the person orients

8

Theory & Psychology 0(0)

to the environment, with the massed resources of past, to meet the present demands of a
game of tennis. This involves not so much separate details of the game but a general
impression  of  the  whole  activity.  Many  details  of  the  environment  will  not  have  any
relevance to the activity and thus will not be attended to. In a later publication, Bartlett
(1935) compares remembering a series of cards, as they are played in a game of bridge
versus  simply  dealing  them  haphazardly.7  In  bridge  there  will  be  an  active  interest  in
remembering the cards to meet the needs of the game. By contrast, the haphazard pres-
entation resembles more paradigm of recall demanded by Ebbinghaus’s method. Bartlett
is emphatic that it is the former ability to remember, as part of a whole living social activ-
ity, that is needed for general functioning in everyday life.

Turning around upon schemata

The most fundamental way in which the past influences the present is by the simple
action of schemata as an organized stream of activity, as happens in habits and basic
skills. This, however, does not describe remembering in the full human sense of the
word.  For  Bartlett,  that  involves  creating  a  discontinuity  in  the  seamless  stream  of
action, in order to locate specific information from the past. For example, while mov-
ing through my routine of preparing to leave the house in the morning, I cannot locate
my keys. I suddenly become self-conscious. Bartlett would say an attitude (or orienta-
tion) is set up, which is then directed toward the events of the previous day in order
to identify where I left my keys. I begin to create distinctions within my duration of
experience—today  versus  yesterday  and  here  versus  there. This  enables  me  to  dis-
tance myself from the here-and-now environment, and as such widen my possibilities
of action within it. At this point the environment becomes dual—I become simul-
taneously  involved  in  a  present  and  past  environment. The  latter  is  used  to  self-
reflectively  control  action  in  the  present.  Bartlett  (1932)  calls  this  “turning  around
upon  [one’s]  own  schemata  and  constructing  them  afresh”  (p.  206),  a  process  he
equates with consciousness.

Turning around upon schemata is involved in any higher mental activity. It points to
the fact that we can reflect on our own activity and thereby bring it under our control. In
Bartlett’s (1932) words, schema becomes “not merely something that works the organ-
ism, but something with which the organism can work” (p. 206). This is done by using
one schema in order to check the action of another schema. It is the unique interplay of
different schemata particular to a given person that gives memory its personal character.8
Recalling  one’s  phone  number  is  a  rather  “low-level”  response  normally  relying  on  a
single  auditory  schema  and  does  not  have  this  experiential  quality.  Here  we  have  an
unbroken  chronological  sequence,  which  Bartlett  believes  is  rarely  advantageous  in  a
constantly changing world. By contrast, when we recall an event or more complex mate-
rial, multiple schemata come into play, supporting or checking each other at different
points.  Bartlett  (1935)  gives  the  example  of  an  enthusiastic  journalist’s  account  of  a
cricket  match:  “To  describe  the  batting  of  one  man  he  finds  it  necessary  to  refer  to  a
sonata  of  Beethoven;  the  bowling  of  another  reminds  him  of  a  piece  of  beautifully
wrought rhythmic prose written by Cardinal Newman” (p. 224). Here different schemata
cross and invade one another, causing the organism to turn around upon them. In this

Wagoner

9

process, the material is put into a new setting (in the above music and poetry) so as to
further current tendencies (writing a description of the event).

In Bartlett’s own experiments, he observed that the setting of an experiment sets up a
predominant  interest  or  attitude  in  the  participant.  This  is  the  “attitude”  or  “general
impression” that the participant then attempts to justify in the act of remembering. The
participant usually proceeds to chronologically recall the material that is the focus of the
task. This may at first move smoothly forward, but at some point the participant will
pause and ask him- or herself “what must have gone here?” At this point, the participant
enters a self-reflexive mode in which schemata are actively manipulated to “fill in gaps”
in memory, analogous to the way the enthusiastic journalist is reminded of Beethoven in
describing a cricket match. What is unclear in this account is precisely how this “turning
around upon [one’s] own schemata” is made possible. Bartlett (1932) acknowledges this
when he says “I wish I knew how it was done” (p. 206). Later he defends the phrase as a
“description” rather than an “explanation” of the process (see Bartlett, 1967).9 In accord-
ance with his functionalist perspective, Bartlett (1937) does provide a number of condi-
tions through which a rupture arises in one’s stream of action and experience: (a) lack of
harmony in cooperative effort; (b) sudden and unexpected change of environment stimu-
lation; (c) clash of testimony about certain practically significant events; and (d) swift
surging up of some definite sensorial image which conflicts notably with whatever is
being done or perceived at the moment.

It is only the fourth in this list (the image) that Bartlett elaborates on in any detail.
Therefore, in what follows I focus on explicating it as a mechanism of self-reflection in
remembering. Somewhat confusingly, Bartlett uses the word “image” to describe both
visual and auditory imagery, though these two have different characteristics for him. In
his experiments, he frequently discusses the conditions under which images arise (e.g.,
when  there  is  ambiguity  or  ambivalence)  and  how  they  in  turn  shape  the  process  of
remembering. For example, he says that the participants who rely on visual imagery tend
to proceed in a jerky or bumpy manner, mix up the original order of presentation, and are
often confident of their memories, though objectively unfounded. This is in contrast to
those who rely more on “vocalization” (i.e., subvocal speech), who tend to better retain
an order and proceed more smoothly, because language is a linear medium and meanings
are given with it directly, though their attitude is often one of doubt.

Later, when outlining his general theory of remembering, Bartlett (1932) gives a distinc-
tive function to images “to pick items out of ‘schemata,’ and to rid the organism of over-
determination by the last preceding member of a given series” (p. 209). He elaborates:

In general, images are a device for picking bits out of schemes, for increasing the chance of
variability in the reconstruction of past stimuli and situations, for surmounting the chronology
of presentations. By the aid of the image, and particularly of the visual image ... a man can take
out of its setting something that happened a year ago, reinstate it with much if not all of its
individuality unimpaired, combine it with something that happened yesterday, and use them
both to help him to solve a problem with which he is confronted to-day [sic]. (p. 219)

Images (both visual and vocal) function to mark salient features (or dominant details) of
an experience in an organized setting in the act of both perceiving and remembering it.10

10

Theory & Psychology 0(0)

Although experiences are particularized through images, it is a mistake to think of them
as passively received copies of experience, as in the storage theory of memory. Instead,
they  are  differentiations  within  organized  settings,  selected  (i.e.,  “picked  out”  or
“unpacked”) as a result of the active interests of the participant. They also change accord-
ing  to  those  interests—they  are  “living”  rather  than  “static.”  In  an  earlier  publication,
Bartlett  (1925)  theorized  that  images  arose  when  there  was  a  conflict  of  tendencies  to
action (i.e., when a reaction is held up) as a way of helping the person to choose between
alternatives. But images can also be dysfunctional, as they tend to overly particularize the
details of a situation such that the person loses the dynamic whole. For example, forming
an image of one’s opponent’s moves in tennis is likely to be a distraction in an ongoing
game; however, one could later use images of the game to reflect on one’s strategy.

At  this  point,  we  are  in  a  position  to  understand  Bartlett’s  (1932)  summary  of  his

theory of remembering:

Remembering is not the re-excitation of innumerable fixed, lifeless and fragmentary traces. It
is an imaginative reconstruction or construction, built out of the relation of our attitude towards
a whole active mass of organised past reactions or experience [i.e., schemata], and to a little
outstanding detail which commonly appears in image or in language form. (p. 213)

Despite its sometimes vague and sketchy formulation, it is clear that Bartlett emphati-
cally rejects the trace theory of remembering and wants to replace it with one in which
the whole active organism takes central place. “Attitude,” “schemata,” and “image” are
all organismic concepts, for Bartlett, which are implicated in a person’s dynamic relating
to the world. They are functions coordinated within a total system, which must make a
unitary response in its environment. Bartlett (1935) bluntly states that his view of remem-
bering fundamentally changes the questions asked by the investigator:

If this view of remembering as a constructive activity is correct, the whole experimental setting
of the problems of recall is changed. In the past the problems have been concerned mainly with
how millions of individual traces can persist intact in the mind or in the central nervous system;
of  how  those  traces,  each  preserving  its  own  individuality,  can  nevertheless  enter  into
associations one with another, and of what main forms of association can be discriminated. For
us, however, the problems fall into two main groups. First, how are the schemes, the organised
patterns of psychological and physiological material formed? We can often watch them in the
process of formation and experimentally change and determine their direction. Second, what
are the conditions and laws of construction in the mental life? These are urgent psychological
problems, not outside the experimentalist’s scope. (p. 226)

Thus, there is the developmental (or “genetic”) question of how schematata are formed
(a long temporality) and a question regarding the processes and dynamics involved in the
act of memory reconstruction (a short temporality). The notion of time implied in this
framework is one of qualitative, accumulative, and irreversible change, which was also
being explored by Bergson, Dewey, and Whitehead around the same time. This notion is
very different from the objective clock time of most experimental studies today. In what
follows we will explore to what extent these questions posed by Bartlett have been pur-
sued by subsequent generations of psychologists in their investigation of schema.

Wagoner

11

Reconstruction of schema, phase 1: Bartlett’s students

As we have seen above, Bartlett put forward a radically new theory of remembering
with the help of the concept of schema; however, the concept remained rather sketchy
and underdeveloped in his work. Bartlett put it aside and moved on to other projects. In
the three decades following the publication of Remembering, the sketchy state of the
schema  concept  changed  little.  There  were  only  a  couple  of  sustained  attempts  to
develop it—many memory studies done in Britain did acknowledge the “schema the-
ory” but did not attempt to elaborate it in any significant way. In a series of articles in
the  British  Journal  of  Psychology,  Bartlett’s  students  Oldfield  and  Zangwill  (1942a,
1942b, 1943) did develop a sustained and meticulous theoretical discussion of the con-
cept and how it had been used by thinkers since Head; however, not long after Bartlett’s
death, Oldfield (1972) and Zangwill (1972) publicly declared that the concept of schema
would  best  be  forgotten.  During  this  first  period  of  reconstruction,  perhaps  the  only
substantial methodological development of Bartlett’s schema concept was the work of
Mary L. Northway.

Northway spent 1935–1936 working with Bartlett at Cambridge, and submitted her
Ph.D. thesis at the University of Toronto on “Bartlett’s Concept of Schema,” which was
published in the British Journal of Psychology (1936, 1940a, 1940b). In the middle arti-
cle (1940a), she carefully teases apart four different (though not necessarily exclusive)
uses that Bartlett makes of the schema concept (nanmely, as a force, form, storehouse,
and apperceptive mass) and then connects these to different influences on his thought
(namely, Head, Ward, and Rivers). To bring clarity to the concept, in such a way that it
might lead to methodological innovations, she invents her own definition of schema as
“what  the  subject  makes  (creates  or  develops)  from  the  given  material  (or  situation)”
(Northway, 1940b, p. 35). This is not a definition that Bartlett himself gives, but is none-
theless closely aligned with his broader theoretical and methodological framework, par-
ticularly  in  his  notion  of  an  “effort  after  meaning.” With  this  definition  as  her  guide,
Northway  develops  two  clever  experimental  studies  with  children  in  Toronto  school
classrooms.

In her first study, Northway (1936) uses Bartlett’s method of serial reproduction to
explore  how  age,  social  background,  and  story  difficulty  provide  different  schemata
through which children can “make something out of the material.” She recruits children
from three different schools: (a) a private girl’s school run by the Church of England
according to longstanding traditions; (b) a public school in the slum area of town, whose
student body was composed mostly of first- to fourth-generation immigrants; and (c) a
country school, described as a “progressive” boarding school for boys on the outskirts of
the city.

She finds that “the less stable social group [i.e., public school children] gave many
more modifications and importations than the comparable age group in a more stabilized
social setting [i.e., the private school]” (Northway, 1940a, p. 325). There was also a dif-
ference in the kinds of items remembered (e.g., basketball) in the different groups. Items
with a high value of social meaningfulness in the group tended to be remembered, illus-
trating once again that remembering is interest- and meaning-driven, and that these are
socially shaped.

12

Theory & Psychology 0(0)

In terms of age differences, not only did the younger children (10 yrs) remember less
than the older children (14–15 yrs), but they were also much more likely to import and
substitute their own ideas into the stories. Furthermore, they “recast” the form, setting,
and style of the stories much more abruptly and earlier in a reproduction chain. Recasting
was usually done by either telling a new story within the same setting as the original or
elaborating some detail in the original into a new setting (e.g., in War of the Ghosts the
death at the end is selected and used to construct another story about a death). Younger
children often created their own “active centers” to the story based on some interest they
had, rather than being constrained by the story’s structure. Finally, there were age differ-
ences in the kinds of “modifications” made to the stories: All children conventionalized
items  of  the  story  (i.e.,  made  changes  towards  common  phraseology)  but  only  older
children rationalized (to create a more reasonable and coherent story), reversed (turning
phrases into their opposites), and substituted (a reason or activity with another).

Northway’s (1936, 1940a) first study demonstrated clear qualitative differences in the
management of schema as a function of age, social background, and story difficulty. In a
second study, also done with Toronto school children, she investigated “the differences
occurring in remembering when the learning methods themselves are devised to allow
the children more or less freedom in ‘making something out of the material’” (Northway,
1940b, p. 22). To do this, she assigns children to one of three different learning methods:
(a) repetition: students learn through rote repetition drills; (b) repetition combined with
discussion:  drills  are  supplemented  with  some  discussion  of  the  text;  and  (c)  project
based: interest-driven learning—for example, making a play or drawing a picture of the
material.

Children read a story about a pirate’s adventures aloud two times and on the next day
they learned it by one of the three learning methods. Three days later the children were
asked to “write a story, pretending you are Don Durk [pirate protagonist] and that you are
sitting at home telling your friends of yourself and your adventure” (Northway, 1940b,
p. 26). This was meant to create an open context of recall to test children’s ability to work
flexibly with the material that they had learned rather than simply reproduce it by rote.
She found that children in the project group were much more likely to add a temporal and
spatial context to the story, add new nouns related to the story theme, and to extend the
topic to include new events. In short, these children were much more capable of recon-
structing  the  story  material  into  new  forms  than  those  of  the  other  groups.  Northway
(1940b) concludes,

It  was  found  that  with  more  freedom  and  participation  in  learning  the  schemata  are  less
controlled by the given material, more adaptable to a new point of view, and more individualistic.
When learning is based on definite instruction, the schemata reflect the material as it was given,
and are stereotyped. (p. 34)

Comparing  Northway’s  concept  of  schema  to  Bartlett’s,  a  number  of  close  parallels
emerge.  First,  both  thinkers  approach  schema  as  part  of  an  ongoing  activity  situated
within  a  particular  environment—thus  the  long  temporality  is  included.  Northway
(1940b) makes clear that she sees her own interventions (i.e., memory tests) with chil-
dren as being just snapshots of a living process of learning and remembering. Second,

Wagoner

13

schema is understood and studied as a flexible adaption to the environment, rather than
imposing the strict accuracy imperative on remembering. Third, there is a focus on quali-
tative differences in schematic organization. Northway (1940b) goes as far as to say that
quantitative differences actually tell us little about schematic differences. In her second
study she includes a more traditional test of rote recall but finds that this analysis can say
very little about what is most essential to “what subjects make of the material” (p. 22).
Fourth,  like  Bartlett,  she  analyzes  remembering  as  socially  embedded  and  interest-
driven. Thus, she finds distinctive patterns of recall for pupils in the three schools and
children of different ages. In highlighting these similarities I do not mean to imply that
Northway merely reproduces Bartlett’s approach; rather I see her as introducing impor-
tant methodological innovations (e.g., comparison of different learning styles on sche-
matic organization) and theoretically elaborating it into a highly suggestive form (i.e.,
“what a subjects makes of the material”).  Unfortunately, little  has since been done to
further develop Northway’s work. Instead, schema would be brought into the mainstream
of psychology in a very different form.

Reconstruction of schema, phase 2: Cognitive
psychology

Schema underwent its most significant change with the rise of cognitive psychology. The
use of a computer metaphor of mind and the methodology of counting units that go in
and come out of a generally fixed system changed schema from a dynamic and embodied
concept that incorporated affect and interests, into a static knowledge structure used to
represent information in the world “out there.” This conceptual change was set in motion
in Bartlett’s own laboratory, where the metaphor of information flow was already begin-
ning to be used to conceptualize person–machine interactions (Wagoner, 2013a). One of
Bartlett’s  students  in  the  laboratory,  Oldfield  (1954),  translated  schema  into  the  new
language of information storage on a computer. Unlike the fixed storage on a wax tablet
or photograph, he argued that computer information storage allowed for “re-codings” of
elements (i.e., binary code) to economize storage and develop new connections between
elements. Reconstruction was then simply a re-coding of elements and schema was the
pattern or plan used to do so. This mechanical metaphor of mind spread widely and set
the stage for the rise of cognitive psychology.

In an early foundational book of cognitive psychology, Neisser (1967) drew heavily
on Bartlett’s (1932, 1958) work, but did so very selectively in order to fit Bartlett’s ideas
into the computer metaphor of mind. For example, there is no mention of “an effort after
meaning”  through  which  schema  enters  a  mental  act  in  Bartlett’s  account.  Instead,
Neisser (1967) clarifies schema through a “program analogy.” Programs, like schemata,
are said to be “a series of instructions” or a “recipe for selecting, storing, recovering, com-
bining, outputting, and generally manipulating [information]” (p. 8). With this analogy,
Neisser strictly separates the psychological level of analysis from the bio-functional—the
former is the software (program) and the latter is the hardware (machinery)—whereas for
Bartlett these were inseparable. Thus, by being defined as a “recipe,” “cognitive struc-
ture,” or “organized representation of prior experience,” schema is severed from its loca-
tion in an active and developing activity.11

14

Theory & Psychology 0(0)

To describe the process of memory reconstruction, Neisser (1967) famously made an
analogy  with  a  paleontologist  who  must  assemble  a  dinosaur  skeleton  from  a  pile  of
bones. Although this is a colorful example, it leads us to think that there are three sepa-
rate kinds of entities involved in the process of reconstructive remembering—a central
executor  (the  paleontologist),  pieces  of  information  (bones),  and  schema  (plan)—and
that only the executor is active (Iran-Nejad & Winsler, 2000). Because schema is already
separate from the executor, there is no need for the notion of “turning around upon one’s
own schemata.” To make the analogy work from a Bartlettian perspective, there would
only be bones, which would have to be continuously self-organizing in relation to the
changing demands of the museum exhibit.

In  the  1970s,  a  number  of  new  concepts  in  cognitive  psychology  were  explicitly
derived from Bartlett’s schema, including Minsky’s (1975) frames, Shank and Abelson’s
(1977) scripts, and Mandler and Johnson’s (1977) story grammar. Minsky was a com-
puter scientist attempting to develop machines with human-like abilities. His concept of
frame  as  “a  data-structure  for  representing  a  stereotyped  situation”  (p.  212)  clearly
reveals this starting point. “A frame,” he says,

… is a network of nodes and relations. The “top” levels of a frame are fixed, and represent thing
that  are  always  true  about  the  supposed  situation. The  lower  levels  have  many  terminals—
“slots” that must be filled with specific instances or data. Each terminal can specify conditions
its assignments must meet. (p. 212)

For example, a schema or frame for a graduate student’s room (top level) contains items,
such as a desk, calendar, pencils, books, and so on (lower level). We are more likely to
remember items in the room that are schema-consistent than inconsistent, and to add items
to our memory of the room which are schema-consistent but were not actually present
(Brewer & Treyens, 1981).12 Shank and Abelson’s (1977) concept of script has the same
general form as frame but is organized into a sequence of actions: “A script is a predeter-
mined, stereotyped sequence of actions that defines a well-known situation” (p. 41). A
restaurant  script,  for  instance,  involves  the  following  sequence  of  actions:  enter,  get
seated, order, eat, pay, and leave. Each one of these discrete actions can be further divided
into simpler actions, such as “go to table,” “pull out chair,” and “sit down” or “get seated.”
Scripts are thus a series of isolated and rather banal actions, with nothing to say about
feelings, interests, and rationalizations that one finds in Bartlett’s work.

Like frames and scripts, Mandler and Johnson’s (1977) concept of story grammar or
story  schema  works  with  the  hierarchical  network  metaphor.  They  explicitly  remove
from their consideration of schema Bartlett’s notions of “literary style, mood, and vari-
ous classes of stories” to narrow schema’s meaning to “an idealized internal representa-
tion  of  the  parts  of  a  typical  story  and  the  relationship  among  these  parts”  (p.  111).
Stories are composed of a setting and an episode, which can be divided into a number of
episodes, each with a “beginning,” “development,” and “end.” The development is fur-
ther subdivided into “complex reaction,” “goal path,” and so on. On a horizontal level
these nodes are connected by and, then, and cause relations. The “story schema” thus
functions as “a set of expectations about the internal structure of stories which serves to
facilitate  both  encoding  and  retrieval”  (p.  112). Analogous  to  the  “deep  grammar”  of

Wagoner

15

Chomskian linguistics, story grammar is said to be an innate and universal property of
mind. War of the Ghosts is shown to deviate considerably from story schema and as such
is considered a bad story in-itself, rather than a story constructed by a culture with differ-
ent norms, activities, and values. Although Mandler and Johnson do predict a number of
omissions  in  story  recall,  they  do  not  attend  to  the  variety  of  different  reproductions
made by participants, which so interested Bartlett. Thus, the social as well as the personal
dimensions of schema are ignored in their account.

On the back of these developments, in a well-known paper, Rumelhart (1980) defined
schema as “a data structure for representing the generic concepts stored in memory” (p.
34). At  this  point  the  concept  has  turned  into  the  opposite  of  the  one  put  forward  by
Bartlett, though it is not exactly the trace theory of memory either. Cognitive psycholo-
gists do retain a notion of hierarchical organization as in Bartlett. But whereas for Bartlett
schema operated as a unitary mass and could not be broken down into elementary units,
the above cognitive psychologists put their emphases on elements in different slots or
nodes of a static structure.13 Because the structure is presumed to be relatively static or
fixed, cognitive psychologists have rarely bothered to do repeated reproduction experi-
ments, and when they have they merely compare later reproductions against the original
material, whereas Bartlett was also attentive to the changes between one reproduction
and another. This is because schemata were said to be always active and developing in
relation to interests and the environment. Likewise, Bartlett’s focus on functional adapta-
tion to the environment is replaced by a Cartesian view of mind removed from the world.
As  such  there  is  no  need  for  or  mention  of  Bartlett’s  notion  of  “turning  around  upon
schemata,” because schemata are already separate from the embodied organism relating
to  its  environment.  Lastly,  early  cognitive  schema  theories  wholly  ignored  attitudes,
interests,  feelings,  rationalizations,  and  a  host  of  other  factors,  which  were  central  to
Bartlett’s characterization of reconstruction, which he notably prefixes with “imagina-
tive.” In short, these early cognitive schema theories are spatial (not temporal), static (not
developing), focused on elements or nodes (not holistic), passive (not active), individual
(not social), and structural (not functional).

Reconstruction of schema, phase 3: Ecological and
discursive psychology

By the late 1980s, psychologists were beginning to again acknowledge the social and
cultural side of Bartlett’s thinking. In 1987, Edwards and Middleton published an impor-
tant  article  arguing  that  many  important  social  dimensions  of  Remembering  had  been
unjustly forgotten. In the years that followed, these authors and others at Loughborough
University developed a sustained program of research on how discursive norms of differ-
ent social contexts shape remembering (e.g., Middleton & Edwards, 1990). Middleton
and  Brown  (2005,  2008)  pointed  out  the  similarities  between  “organized  settings”
(Bartlett’s preferred name for schema) and their own notion of social context, which, like
Bartlett’s  concept,  is  relatively  stable  but  is  also  always  continuously  renegotiated  in
practice.  This  insistence  on  situating  remembering  in  social  context  has  provided  an
important counterweight to the typical belief of experimental psychologists that psycho-
logical processes observed in the laboratory are somehow “pure” and thus more real than

16

Theory & Psychology 0(0)

those observed in everyday life. A side-effect of their emphasis on social context, how-
ever, has been to largely leave aside the personal experiential dimensions of remember-
ing. This has recently been pointed out by a Japanese psychologist, Noahisa Mori, who
in turn has developed a research program that uses insights from discursive psychology
about social context, while focusing on the personal experiential aspects of remembering
(centered in one’s body). Mori (2009) calls his methodology “the schema approach.”

Mori’s  approach  starts  with  a  very  concrete  question:  “how  can  we  distinguish
between  real  remembering  and  fabrication?”  He  was  forced  to  address  this  question
when asked by the police to analyze the credibility of defendant’s testimony of commit-
ting murder. He and his colleagues were able to identify different narrative forms in the
defendant’s remembering “real experiences” and his murder narrative (Hara, Takagi, &
Matsushima,  1997;  Ohashi,  Mori,  Takagi,  &  Matsushima,  2002).  Narratives  of  “real
experiences”  took  the  form  of  what  they  called  agent-alteration:  that  is,  referring  to
agents  of  action  (self  and  others)  alternatively,  such  as  “I  did  …  then  he  did  …  so  I
did…”  This  narrative  form  parallels  Gibson’s  (1979)  “perception–action  cycles,”  the
circular interaction between agent and environment in activity. By contrast the murder
narrative was characterized by agent-succession: that is, referring to agents successively,
such as “I did … there, then I did …”—thus, suggesting it was confabulated.

Mori (2008) wondered if these same narrative forms—for real and confabulated expe-
rience—could be demonstrated in a controlled experiment. He constructed an experiment
that models the real-life social context of an “interrogation.” Participants navigated one of
two university campuses and a month later exchanged information about the navigation
with a participant who navigated the other university campus. Each participant thus had
first-hand knowledge of one university campus and second-hand knowledge of another.
Two weeks later, participants were individually interrogated about what happened during
the two navigations by a third participant (who was told the participants had navigated
both universities). Following Bartlett’s (1932) method of repeated reproduction, an addi-
tional two interrogation sessions took place at two-week intervals. Four participants took
part in the study but only one particularly illustrative case was analyzed, following an
idiographic approach to theory building (Salvatore & Valsiner, 2010).

Mori (2008) found a number of differences between narratives for the two campuses.
First, the agent-alteration/agent-succession contrast Hara et al. (1997) had found in the
murder defendant’s testimony appears again here. For the directly experienced univer-
sity, agent-alteration made up 69.2% of the narrative, whereas the percentage is reversed
for the indirect experience, in which alteration counts for 41.7%. Second, objects tended
to be variously described (e.g., the stairs were “pretty large,” “curved,” and “grey”) in
remembering  the  direct  experience,  whereas  descriptions  were  poorer  for  the  indirect
experience. Third, in the narrative of the direct experience objects tended to be unstably
named, while for the indirect experience naming was more stable. For example, a room
was called “a something room,” “a classroom,” and “a room related to information” in
remembering  the  direct  experience,  whereas  for  indirect  experience  a  room  would  be
given a single name (Mori, 2008, pp. 300–301). Fourth, the motivation for certain behav-
ior tended to be explained as being environmentally induced for the direct experience
and internally induced (e.g., “I thought” or “I guessed”) for the indirect experience. Fifth,
the participant expressed hesitation in drawing a map for the direct experience (signaling

Wagoner

17

a struggle to come into experiential contact with the past) and none for the indirect expe-
rience. For Mori, these all indicate the operation of different “organization of schemata”
in the two conditions. However, all these differences become less apparent with repeated
remembering,  as  a  result  of  inter-  and  intra-personal  conventionalization—the  former
describes what happens when a participant appropriates ways of talking about his or her
experience from the interrogator.

Mori’s  original  contribution  is  to  develop  an  experimental  methodology—“the
schema approach” (Mori, 2009)—that is true to Bartlett’s insight that remembering is
both personal and social. He encompasses the social nature of remembering by devising
an experimental situation that models the social context of an interrogation, in either a
courtroom or a police station. A participant, who was involved in the navigation, engages
in the free flow of conversation with a participant “interrogator,” who does not know that
one of the participant’s narratives is a confabulation. The fact that Mori (2008) found
differences in narrative form in this experiment similar to the real murder testimony (i.e.,
agent-alteration/agent-succession) suggests that he has successfully modeled some fea-
tures of the real situation. Personal experience is brought into his experiment by intro-
ducing the body. In most memory experiments the participant is confined to a chair and
guided to attend only to the memory stimulus; other features of the experimental situa-
tion are simply considered noise to be carefully controlled (Mori, 2010). By contrast, in
Mori’s experiment it is precisely the experience of bodily movement and perception that
the participant remembers (in the direct experience) which the experimenter tries to dis-
cover. We see the personal experiential qualities of coming into bodily “contact” with an
environment  expressing  themselves  subtly  in  a  narrative’s  form.  Mori  shows  that  the
“organization of schemata” in each remembering is different—owing to the qualitative
dissimilarities in the experiences themselves—and that this difference can be uncovered
by analyzing a narrative form.

Conclusion: The past, present, and future of schema

The history of schema demonstrates how the concept was flexibly adapted to meet the
needs of different social contexts, analogous to the process schema itself was meant to
describe at an individual level. As the concept of schema has been continuously recon-
structed, it has changed from an embodied, dynamic, temporal, holistic, and social con-
cept  into  its  opposite  in  cognitive  psychology.  To  summarize  the  story  told,  Head
developed the concept to describe how we coordinate serial movements through time.
Bartlett saw in Head’s schema the foundation for a theory of remembering that did not
rely on memory storage as its root metaphor. He elaborated it in order to describe higher
mental functions, such as remembering, but did so in only a hesitant and sketchy way.
Bartlett’s student Northway further adapted the concept to investigate qualitative differ-
ences for the organization of schema as a function of age, social background, difficulty
of material, and methods used to learn it. Cognitive psychology then radically changed
the concept by using the computer metaphor to articulate it. Schema was transformed
into a static knowledge structure composed of different slots or nodes that either accept
incoming  information  or  fill  in  default  values  where  input  is  lacking.  Schema  is  here
severed from an organism’s functioning in the world. Although there have been attempts

18

Theory & Psychology 0(0)

by discursive and ecological psychologists to bring back the earlier notion of schema in
a new form, these developments have not affected the way in which the concept is gener-
ally understood in psychology.

There are two major obstacles in bringing the Bartlettian concept of schema back into
psychology: one meta-theoretical and one methodological. Meta-theoretically, the stor-
age metaphor is both the commonsense and scientific taken-for-granted way of concep-
tualizing memory. As was seen with cognitive theories, theorists easily slip back into the
language and assumptions of the storage metaphor. What is needed are powerful new
metaphors  to  guide  theory  and  research.  One  example  is  schema  as  “stage  setting,”
advanced by Bransford, McCarrell, Franks, and Nitsch (1977) as an explicit develop-
ment of Bartlett and Gibson’s ideas. According to them, “a major role of past experience
is to provide ‘boundary constraints’ that set the stage for articulating the uniqueness as
well as sameness of information” (p. 434). This is very different from the notion that past
experience  is  stored  as  traces  and  compared  to  present  inputs.  Instead,  it  highlights
organismic attunement to the environment based on past experience, operating as a back-
ground condition rather than as isolated and fixed traces or a static framework composed
of isolated nodes that receive information. For example, if one is used to driving a pickup
truck,  this  will  set  the  stage  for  articulating  the  smoothness  of  a  car’s  ride.  Likewise,
remembering  involves  attunement  (an  attitude)  and  contextual  information  to  set  the
stage on which previous experience is reconstructed within these given constraints.

Methodologically, psychology needs to invent new methods of bringing time, as an
indivisible movement, back into its studies. Time is typically spatialized in psychologi-
cal research by only considering clock time and by simply counting and averaging items
between participants at one point in time. This fails to address the two questions that
Bartlett (1935) set as a research agenda, namely how schemata develop and what are the
processes of memory reconstruction. Above I called these a long and short temporality,
respectively, because they necessitate situating psychological processes in the “irrevers-
ibility of time,” to borrow a phrase from Bergson. Time in this conception involves quali-
tative and accumulative change.

Bartlett (1928) gives an example of the long temporality in relation to Watson and
Rayner’s (1920) famous experiment on “little Albert,” whom they taught to fear white
rats (among other white fluffy things) by presenting a loud noise when the rat was pre-
sent. From an ecological perspective these psychologists were shaping a certain attune-
ment or orientation to the environment. It is not possible to erase this earlier experience
(i.e., reverse time) with white rats but the schema can nonetheless be further developed
through new encounters. Bartlett (1928) suggests introducing another boy into the set-
ting to play with the white rat and for Albert to observe, which will stimulate curiosity to
counterbalance the fear. Bartlett’s (1932) repeated reproduction method, which analyzes
qualitative changes in single cases (Wagoner, 2009), is itself a powerful means of explor-
ing the long temporality, as is its extension in Northway’s (1940b) and Mori’s (2008)
studies focusing on the “organization of schema.” These latter studies are interesting in
that they explicitly look at how the dynamic social and cultural relations of a context of
reproduction feed-forward into the next reproduction, setting the stage for reconstruction
there. In other words, rather than seeing schema as simply in the head, they highlight
how  social  and  cultural  aspects  of  the  setting  are  continuously  interwoven  into  the

Wagoner

19

person’s evolving schema. Others have also begun to develop schema in a more inclusive
social and cultural direction to answer the questions about its long temporality: for exam-
ple, McVee et al. (2005) combine it with neo-Vygotskyian concepts of mediation within
the field of education, and Beals (1998) extends it with Bakhtin’s concepts of speech
genres and heteroglossia.

Exploring the short temporality was more of a problem for Bartlett in that he had to
rely on notes he took while carefully observing his participants during the experimental
task and their occasional comments. Today, psychologists can use video recorders and
other  technologies,  which  were  unavailable  to  Bartlett,  to  scrutinize  the  moment-to-
moment processes of remembering in their details, as Middleton and Edwards (1990)
and Mori (2008) have done. These experiments set up a conversational task to create
conditions in which participants externalize and objectify their thinking, so as to record
remembering as it occurs and then analyze it in its temporal dimensions. More recently,
I (Wagoner, 2011, 2012) have suggested conceptualizing the process of “turning around
upon  schemata”  with  theories  of  self-reflection  from  Vygotsky  and  G.  H.  Mead.  As
already noted, Bartlett could not explain the process of “turning around upon schemata”
and at the end of his life he said it simply described what was happening. Vygotsky’s
“sign” and Mead’s “significant symbol” can provide the missing mechanism that explains
how we can experientially move outside ourselves and thereby reflect on our own activ-
ity. In Vygotsky’s (1987) account this is possible because the sign is by definition a social
relation,  having  been  internalized  through  interaction  with  others  in  social  practices
(Veresov, 2010). Similarly, Mead (1934) describes how I can take the perspective of the
other towards myself through the vocal gesture, because I have heard it from both sides
of a social act (Gillespie, 2007). Applying this framework, the researcher can analyze
“turning around upon schemata” as a process of sign mediation in which the person both
stimulates and evaluates his or her memory with signs (see Wagoner & Gillespie, 2013).
In addition to providing an analytic strategy for investigating the short temporality, this
extension also brings back the social and cultural focus into the act of remembering.

All  these  reconstructions  of  schema  are,  however,  rather  preliminary  steps;
much remains to be done to fully develop the concept for an integrated theory of
remembering.

Funding

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or
not-for-profit sectors.

Notes

  1.  Piaget is another source from which psychology takes the notion of “schema,” but will not be

considered in this article.

  2.  Contemporary neuroscience is increasingly moving towards a conceptualization of the brain as
a contextual, holistic, and dynamic system that never returns to the same state twice, and as such
the notion of memory as a static register of an experience looks more and more implausible
even from a neurological perspective (see Singer, 2007). From this new neurological perspec-
tive, Nobel Prize-winning scientist Gerard Edelman (2005) has developed alternative active and
dynamic metaphors of memory using immunology and Darwinian natural selection as models.

20

Theory & Psychology 0(0)

  3.  Harré has noted psychology’s historical neglect of Wundt’s cultural-normative side of the dis-

cipline by exclusively focusing on the experimental-causal side.

  4.  The  contemporary  equivalent  of  this  position  is  ecological  psychology,  which  follows  the

work of J. J. Gibson.

  5.  Bartlett read Bergson with enthusiasm at the beginning of his career. The influence of Bergson
is likely significant, though Bartlett does not cite him. A thorough study of this link still needs
to be made.

  6.  This notion of schema comes very close to the way it is used by Johnson (1987).
  7.  Studies  in  memory  expertise  have  made  similar  points.  Chess  masters,  for  instance,  have
excellent memory for chess positions in an actual game, but remember no better than novices
for randomly placed pieces (Chase & Simon, 1973).

  8.  Halbwachs (1992) similarly argued that it was the unique interplay between different social

frameworks in an individual that made memory feel personal.

  9.  Bartlett’s thinking on this point in many ways resembles the pragmatist’s theory of action and
self-reflection (see Gillespie, 2007). I have argued elsewhere (Wagoner, 2012) that G. H. Mead’s
(1934) theory of self-reflection is superior to Bartlett’s in that it provides a social mechanism for
the process, whereas Bartlett (1967) is content to remain at the level of description. However,
the two approaches can also be fruitfully combined (Wagoner & Gillespie, 2013)

10.  This image function, where information can be lifted from one setting and brought into another,
parallels Bartlett’s (1923) theorizing of “diffusion by borrowing,” whereby an individual trav-
els abroad and in returning home introduces a foreign element of culture into his or her group
(see Wagoner, 2013b, 2013c).

11.  Neisser (1976) later criticized his own position, after having been persuaded by J. J. Gibson

that an ecological approach was necessary.

12.  Brewer  (2000;  Brewer  &  Nakamura,  1984)  has  also  written  a  number  of  important  meta-
reflections on the concept of schema. His position is very much within the cognitive line of
thinking and Minsky’s theory in particular.

13.  McVee, Dunsmore, and Gavelek (2005) have earlier criticized the cognitive concept of schema

for failing to explore its origins and development.

References

Bartlett,  F.  C.  (1916).  An  experimental  study  of  some  problems  of  perceiving  and  imagining.

British Journal of Psychology, 8, 222–266.

Bartlett, F. C. (1923). Psychology and primitive culture. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University

Press.

Bartlett, F. C. (1925). Feeling, imaging and thinking. British Journal of Psychology, 16, 16–28.
Bartlett, F. C. (1928). The psychological process of sublimation. Scientia, 43, 89–98.
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology. Cambridge,

UK: Cambridge University Press.

Bartlett, F. C. (1935). Remembering. Scientia, 57, 221–226.
Bartlett, F. C. (1937). Some problems in the psychology of temporal perception. Philosophy, 12,

457–465.

Bartlett, F. C. (1958). Thinking: An experimental and social study. London, UK: George Allen &

Unwin.

Bartlett,  F.  C.  (1967).  Notes  on  remembering.  Retrieved  from  http://www.bartlett.psychol.cam.

ac.uk/NotesOnRemembering.htm

Beals,  D.  E.  (1998).  Reappropriating  schema:  Conceptions  of  development  from  Bartlett  and

Bakhtin. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 5, 3–24.

Wagoner

21

Bransford,  J.  D.,  McCarrell,  N.  S.,  Franks,  J.  J.,  &  Nitsch,  K.  E.  (1977).  Toward  unexplaining
memory. In R. E. Shaw & J. D. Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving, acting, and knowing: Toward an
ecological psychology (pp. 431–466). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Brewer, W. F. (2000). Bartlett’s concept of schema. In A. Saito (Ed.), Bartlett, culture and cogni-

tion (pp. 115–134). London, UK: Psychology Press.

Brewer, W. F., & Nakamura, G. V. (1984). The nature and functions of schemas. In R. S. Wyer &
T. K. Srull (Eds.), Handbook of social cognition (Vol. 1, pp. 119–160). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brewer,  W.  F.,  &  Treyens,  J.  C.  (1981).  Role  of  schemata  in  memory  for  places.  Cognitive

Psychology, 13, 207–230.

Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). The mind’s eye in chess. In G. H. Chase (Ed.), The psychol-

ogy of learning and motivation (Vol. 16, pp. 1–58). New York, NY: Academic Press.

Collins, A. (2006). The embodiment of reconciliation: Order and change in the work of Frederic

Bartlett. History of Psychology, 9, 290–312.

Danziger,  K.  (2002).  How  old  is  psychology,  particularly  concepts  of  memory?  History  of

Philosophy of Psychology, 4, 1–12.

Danziger,  K.  (2008).  Marking  the  mind:  A  history  of  memory.  Cambridge,  UK:  Cambridge

University Press.

Ebbinghaus,  H.  (1913).  Memory:  A  contribution  to  experimental  psychology.  New  York,  NY:

Teachers College, Columbia University. (Original work published 1885)

Edelman, G. (2005). Wider than the sky: The phenomenal gift of consciousness. New Haven, CT:

Yale University Press.

Edwards, D., & Middleton, D. (1987). Conversation and remembering: Bartlett revised. Applied

Cognitive Psychology, 1, 77–92.

Gibson, J. J. (1979). An ecological approach to visual perception. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Gillespie,  A.  (2007).  The  social  basis  of  self-reflection.  In  J.  Valsiner  &  A.  Rosa  (Eds.),  The
Cambridge handbook of socio-cultural psychology (pp. 678–691). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.

Haddon, A. C. (1894). The decorative art of British New Guinea: A study of Papuan ethnography.

Dublin, Ireland: The Academy House.

Halbwachs, M. (1992). On collective memory. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Hara,  S.,  Takagi,  K.,  &  Matsushima,  K.  (1997).  Psychological  analysis  of  the  communication
style of the accused in trail (II)—A murder case at Ashikaga. Surugadai University Studies,
14, 109–176.

Harré, R. (2002). Cognitive science: A philosophical introduction. London, UK: Sage.
Head, H. (1920). Studies in neurology. London, UK: Hodder & Stoughton.
Head, H. (1926). Aphasia and kindred disorders of speech (2 vols.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge

University Press.

Iran-Nejad, A., & Winsler, A. (2000). Bartlett’s schema theory and modern accounts of learning

and remembering. Journal of Mind and Behavior, 23, 5–36.

Johnson, M. (1987). The body in the mind: The bodily basis of meaning, imagination and reason.

Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Mandler, J. M., & Johnson, N. S. (1977). Rememberance of things parsed: Story  structure and

recall. Cognitive Psychology, 9, 111–151.

McVee,  M.  B.,  Dunsmore,  K.,  &  Gavelek,  J.  R.  (2005).  Schema  theory  revised.  Review  of

Educational Research, 75, 531–566.

Mead, G. H. (1934). Mind, self and society: From the standpoint of a social behaviorist. Chicago,

IL: University of Chicago Press.

Middleton, D., & Brown, S. D. (2005). The social psychology of experience: Studies in remembering

and forgetting. London, UK: Sage.

22

Theory & Psychology 0(0)

Middleton,  D.,  &  Brown,  S.  D.  (2008).  Issues  in  the  socio-cultural  study  of  memory:  Making
memory matter. In J. Valsiner & A. Rosa (Eds.). Cambridge handbook of socio-cultural psy-
chology (pp. 205–237). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.

Middleton,  D.,  &  Edwards,  D.  (1990).  Conversational  remembering:  A  social  psychologi-
cal  approach.  In  D.  Middleton  &  D.  Edwards  (Eds.),  Collective  remembering  (pp.  23–46).
London, UK: Sage.

Minsky, M. (1975). A framework for representing knowledge. In P. H. Winston (Ed.), The psy-

chology of computer vision (pp. 211–277). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.

Mori, N. (2008). Styles of remembering and types of experience: An experimental investiga-
tion  of  reconstructive  memory.  Integrative  Psychological  and  Behavioral  Science,  42,
291–314.

Mori, N. (2009). The schema approach. In J. Valsiner, P. Molenaar, N. Chaudhary, & M. Lyra
(Eds.), Handbook of dynamic process methodology in the social and developmental sciences
(pp. 123–140). New York, NY: Springer.

Mori, N. (2010). Remembering with others: The veracity of an experience in the symbol forma-
tion process. In B. Wagoner (Ed.), Symbolic transformation: The mind in movement through
culture and society (pp. 142–158). London, UK: Routledge.

Munk, H. (1890). Über die Functionen der Grosshirnrinde [About the functions of the cerebral

cortex] (2nd ed.). Berlin, Germany: Hirschwald.

Neisser, U. (1967). Cognitive psychology. New York, NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Neisser, U. (1976). Cognition and reality. New York, NY: W. H. Freeman.
Northway, M. L. (1936). The influence of age and social group on children’s remembering. British

Journal of Psychology, 27, 11–29.

Northway, M. L. (1940a). The concept of “schema”: Part I. British Journal of Psychology, 30,

316–325.

Northway, M. L. (1940b). The concept of “schema”: Part II. British Journal of Psychology, 31,

22–36.

Ohashi,  Y.,  Mori,  N.,  Takagi,  K.,  &  Matsushima,  K.  (2002).  Psychologists  meet  trails.  Kyoto,

Japan: Kitaooji Shobo. (In Japanese)

Oldfield,  R.  C.  (1954).  Memory  mechanisms  and  the  theory  of  schemata.  British  Journal  of

Psychology, 45, 14–23.

Oldfield, R. C. (1972). Frederic Charles Bartlett: 1886–1969. The American Journal of Psychology,

85, 133–40.

Oldfield,  R.  C.,  &  Zangwill,  O.  L.  (1942a).  Head’s  concept  of  the  schema  and  its  application
in  contemporary  British  psychology  I:  Head’s  concept  of  the  schema.  British  Journal  of
Psychology, 32, 267–286.

Oldfield, R. C., & Zangwill, O. L. (1942b). Head’s concept of the schema and its application in
contemporary  British  psychology  II:  Critical  analysis  of  Head’s  theory.  British  Journal  of
Psychology, 33, 58–64.

Oldfield, R. C., & Zangwill, O. L. (1943). Head’s concept of the schema and its application in con-
temporary British psychology III: Bartlett’s theory of memory. British Journal of Psychology,
33, 113–129.

Rumelhart, D. E. (1980). Schemata: The building blocks of cognition. In R. J. Spiro, B. C. Bruce,
& W. F. Brewer (Eds.), Theoretical issues in reading comprehension: Perspectives from cog-
nitive psychology, linguistics, artificial intelligence, and education (pp. 33–58). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Salvatore, S., & Valsiner, J. (2010). Between the general and the unique: Overcoming the nomo-

thetic versus idiographic opposition. Theory & Psychology, 20, 817–833.

Shank, R., & Abelson, R. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals and understanding. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Wagoner

23

Singer, W. (2007). Understanding the brain. European Molecular Biology Organization Reports,

8, 16–19.

Veresov, N. (2010). Forgotten methodology: Vygotsky’s case. In A. Toomela & J. Valsiner (Eds.),

Methodological thinking in psychology (pp. 267–296). Charlotte, NC: Info Age.

Vygotsky, L. (1987). The collected works of L. S. Vygotsky: Vol. 4. The history of the development

of higher mental functions. New York, NY: Plenum.

Wagoner, B. (2009). The experimental methodology of constructive microgenesis. In J. Valsiner,
P. Molenaar, N. Chaudhary, & M. Lyra (Eds.), Handbook of dynamic process methodology in
the social and developmental sciences (pp. 99–121). New York, NY: Springer.

Wagoner, B. (2011). Meaning construction in remembering: A synthesis of Bartlett and Vygotsky.
In P. Stenner, J. Cromby, J. Motzkau, & J. Yen (Eds.), Theoretical psychology: Global trans-
formations and challenges (pp. 105–114). Toronto, Canada: Captus Press.

Wagoner, B. (2012). Culture in constructive remembering. In J. Valsiner (Ed.), Oxford handbook

of culture and psychology (pp. 1034–1055). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Wagoner, B. (2013a). Bartlett in reconstruction: Where culture and mind meet. Cambridge, UK:

Cambridge University Press.

Wagoner, B. (2013b). Culture and mind in reconstruction: Bartlett’s analogy between individual
and group processes. In A. Marvakis, J. Motzkau, D. Painter, R. Ruto-Korir, G. Sullivan,
S.  Triliva,  &  M.  Wieser  (Eds.),  Doing  psychology  under  new  conditions  (pp.  273–278).
Concord, Canada: Captus Press.

Wagoner, B. (2013c). A systemic approach to cultural diffusion and reconstruction. In K. R. Cabell

& J. Valsiner (Eds.), The conditions that cultivate. New York, NY: Springer.

Wagoner, B., & Gillespie, A. (2013). Sociocultural mediators of remembering: An extension of

Bartlett’s method of repeated reproduction. Manuscript submitted for publication.

Watson, J. B., & Rayner, R. (1920). Conditioned emotional reactions. Journal of Experimental

Psychology, 3, 1–14.

Zangwill,  O.  L.  (1972).  Remembering  revisited.  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  Experimental

Psychology, 24, 123–138.

Author biography

Brady Wagoner is Professor MSO and Director of the MA program in Cultural Psychology and
Social Practice at Aalborg University. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Cambridge,
where he was also co-creator of the Sir Frederic Bartlett Archive and the journal Psychology &
Society. Additionally, he is associate editor for Culture & Psychology and Peace & Conflict, and
on  the  editorial  board  of  five  other  journals.  His  books  include  Symbolic  Transformation
(Routledge, 2010), Dialogicality in Focus (Nova, 2011), Culture and Social Change (Info Age,
2012), and Development as a Social Process (Routledge, 2013). He is currently working on a book
titled Bartlett in Reconstruction: Where Culture and Mind Meet (Cambridge). Address: Department
of Communication & Psychology, Aalborg University, Kroghstæde 3, Aalborg, 9220, Denmark.
[email: wagoner@hum.aau.dk]


